# Lecture 3: Transfers

## Defining Some Transfers

Recall that we have the sheaves $K^{MW}_*, GW$, and the sheaf property means that an inclusion $K \injects L$ induces a map $\spec(L) \to \spec(K)$. We can take $GW(\spec(L) \to \spec(K))$, and this is exactly the restriction/base change given by $\wait \tensor_k L$ of bilinear forms.

We also saw that these were stable homotopy sheaves, so there should be transfers, and we want to use them for field extensions. Let $K\subset L$ be a finite extension of finite-type schemes over $k$. This leads to transfer maps
$$
\Tr_{L/K}: GW(K) \to GW(L).
$$

There is also a geometric transfer (which is the prettiest!) which we'll define momentarily, given by with multiplication by one of those brackets to define a cohomological transfer. The geometric transfer will depend on a sequence of generators, while, while this choice can be removed for the cohomological transfer. If you use the twisting data you can get an absolute transfer.

In the case where $K\subset L$ is separable, there is a canonical way to explicitly untwist, and the absolute and cohomological transfers agree.  For these two, we took
$$
\Tr(B: V^2 \to L) = V^2 \mapsvia{B} L \mapsvia{\Tr_{W^k}}
$$
where we now view $V$ as a $k\dash$vector space, and $\Tr_{W^k}$ is the trace from Galois theory, the sum of the Galois conjugates.

We'll show that we have this structure for the geometric transfer. If $L = K[z]/\generators{f}$, so we've chosen some generator, then we get an induced map $\spec(L) \overset{z}\injects \PP^1_K$. Since this is a closed immersion corresponding to $z$, we can form a backwards map
$$
\PP^1_K \to {\PP^1_K \over \PP^1_K-\theset{z}} \homotopic \PP^1_L
$$
by crushing everything but $z$, where the last equivalence was seen in the previous lecture. But now we can take $K^{MW}_1(\PP^1_K \to \PP^1_L)$, which is a map
$$
\Tr_{L/K}^{\text{geom}}:  GW(L) \to GW(K)
$$

So we have some transfers.

## Bilinear Forms on Chow Groups

The finale of this morning was going to be adding bilinear forms to Chow groups for the purposes of having a tool in enumerative geometry. So let $X\in\Sm$ and $X^{(i)}$ codimension $i$ reduced, irreducible subschemes of $X$. Then
$$
CH^i(X) = {\bigoplus_{X^{(i)}} \ZZ \over \sim}
$$

where $\sim$ is rational equivalence, the equivalence relation generated by taking subvarieties of $V\subset X\cross \PP^1$ and equating the fibers and the endpoints $V_{\theset{1}} \sim V_{\theset{0}}$, i.e. $V\intersect (X\cross\theset{1}) \sim V\intersect (X\cross\theset{0})$.

These are useful in enumerative geometry -- there are Chern classes, pushforwards, pullbacks, a ring structure, etc. This ring structure lets us do intersection theory, providing some machinery to help with enumerative questions.

The $i$th Chow group, in addition to being a motivic homology group, also has a nice formula due to Bloch that applies in the case of smooth schemes: $CH^i(X) \cong H^i(X; K^{M}_i)$ where the RHS is the Nisnevich cohomology of $X$ with coefficients in Milnor $K\dash$theory.

Oriented Chow groups (AKA Chow-Witt groups) which are the original Chow groups together with a bilinear form. By Borge and Morel, motivated by the Bloch formula above, these can be defined as
$$
\widetilde{CH}{}^i(X) \definedas H^i(X; K_i^{MW}).
$$

This can be computed by a complex (as in Morel's book):

\begin{align*}
\cdots \to \bigoplus_{z\in X^{(ii1)}} K^{MW}_{1}(K(z), ~\det_{k(z)} T_z X) \to \bigoplus_{z\in X^{(i)}} GW(K(z), ~\det_{k(z)} T_z X)  \to \bigoplus_{z\in X^{(i+1)}} K^{MW}_{-1}(K(z), ~\det_{k(z)} T_z X)  \to \cdots
.\end{align*}

where $k(z)$ is the function field, and since $z$ has a generic point, we can take the highest wedge power of the tangent space of $X$ at $z$ to yield the determinant term, which serves as an added twist. This explains why elements of the oriented Chow are formal combinations of codimension $i$ subvarieties $z\in X^{(i)}$ and a bilinear form over $k(z)$, $B\in GW(k(z))$.

There's structure here -- Fasel developed ring structure and pushforwards, while in the context of enumerative geometry, Mark Levine works with these. All in all, we have pullbacks, pushforwards, a noncommutative ring structure, and we can twist these groups as well.

## Twisted Chow

First we'll define the twists appearing in the complex above, and then we can define how to do twisted Chow so we can do pushforwards.

If $E$ is a field of finite type over $k$, then $K^{MW}_i(E; \Lambda)$ ("twisted by $\Lambda$") where $\Lambda$ is a 1-dimensional $E\dash$vector space can be defined as
$$
K^{MW}_i(E) \underset{\ZZ[E^\times]}\tensor \ZZ[\Lambda - \theset{0}]
$$

since $E^\times$ acts of the LHS due to the bracket $E$ in the Grothendieck-Witt group, and the RHS is possible because we can act on the nonzero elements of the vector space.

We can also twist by line bundles $L \to X$, leading to a definition of **oriented Chow groups twisted by local coefficients** via $\widetilde{CH}{}^i(X; L) \definedas H^i(X; K^{MW}_i(L))$ where we just take $K\dash$Milnor-Witt and twist by $L$.

For any proper $f: X\to Y$ where $\dim Y - \dim X = r$, then we have a pushforward map
$$
f_*: \widetilde{CH}{}^i(X, \omega_{X/k}\tensor f^* \mathcal L) \to \widetilde{CH}{}^{i-r}(Y, \omega_{Y/k}\tensor \mathcal L)
$$

where $\omega_{X/K}$ is the canonical line bundle of $X$ over $k$ given by $\det TX$, the determinant of the tangent bundle of $X$, and $f^* \mathcal L$ is the pullback of any line bundle from $f$.

Note that the bilinear form here acts like an orientation (which is exciting!), hence the name.

# Degree by Local Degree

Recall from Algebraic Topology that if we have a smooth map $f:S^n \to S^n$, then there is a notion of degree given picking regular values $p\in S^n$, so the preimage consists of finitely many points $f\inv(p) = \theset{q_1, \dots, q_n}$, and we define $\deg f = \sum \underset{q_i}\deg f$ to be the sum of local degrees. There is a formula for computing the degree from differential topology,  given by choosing coordinates $x_1, \cdots, x_n$ near $q_i$ and $y_1, \cdots, y_n$ near $p$ which are compatible with orientations. Then $f:\RR^n\to\RR^n$, so we can form its Jacobian $\operatorname{Jac}(f) = \det J$ where that matrix $J$ is given by $(J)_{i,j} = \dd{f_i}{x_j}$. We then have

\begin{align*}
\underset{q_i}\deg f = \begin{cases}
    1,  & $\operatorname{Jac}(f) > 0$ \\
    -1, & $\operatorname{Jac}(f) < 0$.
\end{cases}

.\end{align*}
